# B? H?

There’s often confusion surrounding these two terms. **H** is the **magnetic field intensity**, whereas **B** is the **magnetic flux density**. That is definitely not adequate.

We must remember the Biot-Savart law, used to calculate the magnetic field of a current element. Just for the sake of recollection:

$$
\vec{dB} = \frac{\mu_0}{4 \pi}\frac{I \vec{dl} \times \vec{(r-l)}}{|r-l|^3} \qquad \mu_0 = 4 \pi 10^{-7} \text{ henry/meter}
$$

But when generated fields pass through magnetic materials, ambiguities arise about what part of the field comes from the external currents and what comes from the material itself. 

Say we have multiple turns of a conductor (solenoid), and we pass current through it. This current will generate a magnetic field $B_0$ and we can visualise the flux lines going through the interior of the solenoid, which is currently just air.

Say we put a material inside the solenoid, which is magnetic, i.e. it has non-zero **magnetisation**. A circulating electron in an atom has a moment, and these magnetic moments add up to give a net magnetic moment. This net magnetic moment per unit volume is defined to be the **magnetisation** of a material sample,  

$$
\vec{M} = \frac{\vec{m_{net}}}{V}
$$

Now, the net generated field in the interior of the solenoid will be greater than $B_0$, 

$$
B_{net} = B_0 + B_m
$$

**$B_m$** turns out to be proportional to the magnetisation **M** of the material that we chuck inside the solenoid: $\vec{B_m} = \mu_0 \vec{M}$

A vector field **H** is defined, that is to be the result of solely the external currents applied to the solenoid, irrespective of core material we put inside it and it’s magnetic response,  ****

$$
\vec{H} =
\frac{\vec{B_0}}{\mu_0} = \frac{\vec{B_{net}}}{\mu_0} - \vec{M}
$$

In other words, **H** describes the part of the field generated from applying the current to a material, and not from the material’s intrinsic magnetic properties. Whereas **B** in general, is the net magnetic field strength. 

For a non-magnetic material (e.g., free-space), they are related as such,

$$
B = \mu_0 H \text{ weber/m}^2 \text{ or T} \qquad \text{as }\vec{M}=0
$$

Quoting from this [StackExchange](https://physics.stackexchange.com/a/283484) answer: 

> Electric current $I$ produces around itself magnetic field strength "$\vec{H}$" (also called as **"Magnetic field intensity"**) regardless the type of the surrounding medium. **"Magnetic Flux density"** ”$\vec{B}$” is a response of the medium to the applied excitation $\vec{H}$.
> 

But there is more. There is another layer to unravel. 

Repeating, **H** is the field caused due to external factors, such as current that is applied to a material. 

The **M** for a material, is responsible for the part of the net field caused due to the magnetic properties of the material itself. 

The field due to **M**, is also influenced by external factors. The dependence of **M** on external factors is given through this relation,

$$
\vec{M} = \chi \vec{H}
$$

where $\chi$ is the **magnetic susceptibility** of the material, and is a measure of how a magnetic material responds to an external field.

Time to do some maths,

$$
\begin{align*}
\vec{B_{net}}
 &= \mu_0 (\vec{H}+\vec{M}) \\
 &= \mu_0(1+\chi)\vec{H} \\
 &= \mu_0 \mu_r \vec{H} \\
 &= \mu \vec{H}
\end{align*}
$$

$\mu_r$ is the **relative magnetic permeability** of the substance, and $\mu$ is the **magnetic permeability**. 

### Types of Magnetic Materials

A material is kept in a uniform magnetic field and then that field is varied. According it how it responds, we can classify,

1. Diamagnetic Materials (small and negative $\chi$)
    
    Dipoles in these materials align opposite to the applied field, and thus they produce and internal magnetic field that opposed the applied external field
    
2. Paramagnetic Materials (small and positive $\chi$)
    
    Dipoles align in the direction of the applied field, and thus reinforce it. These substances may feebly move in the direction of the magnetic field, as they get magnetised by it
    
3. Ferromagnetic Materials (large and positive $\chi$)
    
    Dipoles exist in domains. Domains usually cancel each other out, but get aligned in presence of an external field to produce a strong internal magnetic field. Even upon removal of the external field, the domains remain aligned - we can kind of make sort of permanent magnets out of these?
    

Iron, Cobalt, Nickel and Neodymium are ferromagnetic materials, and these and their alloys are what are mostly used in permanent magnet machines.

### Ampere’s Current Law

A current carrying conductor produces a magnetic field around it. *Right hand thumb rule* can give the direction of the magnetic field lines. According to the Ampere’s Current Law, the line integral of the magnetic field intensity H, around a closed path is equal to the total current linked by the contour.

$$
\oint H . dl = \sum i
$$

or,

$$
\oint H dl \hspace{0.1em}\cos\theta = i_1 + i_2 + ... + i_n
$$

In the above equation, **H** is the **magnetic field intensity** at a point on the contour, $dl$ is the incremental length at that point and $\theta$ is the angle between the two vectors. 

For e.g., say I have a conductor with $i$ current flowing through it. If I want to find the magnetic field intensity at a point $r$ distance away from the conductor, I can simply draw a circle of radius $r$ that passes through that point. Since it’s a circle, **H** and $dl$ will be parallel, i.e. $\theta = 0$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\oint H.dl &= i \\
H \hspace{0.1em} 2 \pi r &= i \\
H &= \frac{i}{2 \pi r}
\end{aligned}
$$

###